Was it a mistake for the United States to invade Afghanistan in 2001,
20 years ago? Yes. As simple as, yes. Why was it a mistake?
I'm an historian. So I say this with, you know,
some humility about what we can though. I think, you know,
I'd still like to know much more about what was going in the white house,
you know, in the hours, days, weeks, you know, after nine 11.
But I think the George W.
Bush administration acted in a state of panic and I think they wanted to show
kind of toughness. They wanted to show some kind of resolve, you know,
this was a horrific act that played out, you know,
on everyone's television screen.
And I think it was really a fundamentally a crisis of legitimacy within the
white house than the oval office.
And I think they felt like they had to do something and something dramatic.
I think they didn't really think through, you know, who they were fighting,
you know, who the enemy was, what this geography had to do with nine 11.
I think looking back at it, I mean, some of us not to say I was, you know,
clairvoyant or could see into the future, but I think many of us were, you know,
from that morning skeptical about the connections that people were drawing
between Afghanistan as a state, as a place. And, you know,
the actions of Alqaeda in Washington and New York and, and Pennsylvania.
So as you watch the events of nine 11,
the things that our leaders were saying in the,
in the minutes, hours, days, weeks that followed,
maybe you can give a little bit of a timeline in of what was being said.
One was the actual invasion of, of Afghanistan. And also,
what were your feelings in the minutes? Weeks after nine 11?
I was in DC. I was, you know, I, on the way to American university, uh,
hearing on NPR, what had happened. Um, and I thought of the
American university logo, which is red, white, and blue <laugh>, it's an Eagle.
And I thought, you know,
Washington is under attack and symbols of American power are under attack.
And so, um, you, I, I was quite concerned and at the time lived, you know,
just a few miles from the capital. And so, um, you know, I, I, I felt that,
you know, it was, it was real. So I appreciate the, you know, the,
the sense of anxiety and fear and panic. And for two, three years later in DC,
we were constantly getting reports, you know,
mostly rumors and unconfirmed about all kinds of attacks all the city.
So I definitely, um, appreciate the sense of being under salt,
but in watching television, including Russian television that day. Cause I just,
it just installed a satellite thing.
So I was trying to watch world news and get different points of view.
And that was quite useful to have an alternative, you know,
set of eyes in Russian. Yeah. In Russian. Yeah.
Okay. So your Russian is, is, uh, is good enough to understand.
Uh, Russian television, the news. Yeah.
The news and the visuals that were coming that were not shown on American
television. I don't know how they had it, but they had,
they were not filtering anything in the way that the Metro networks and cable
televisions were doing here. So it was a very unvarnished view of,
of the violence of, of the moment, you know, in New York city of,
of people diving from the towers or being dis you know, and it was really,
they didn't hold back on that, which was quite, you know, fascinating.
I think much of the world saw much more than actually the American public saw.
But to your question, you know, amid that feeling of imminent doom,
I watched commentators start to talk about Al-Qaeda and then talk about
Afghanistan. And one of the experts was, um, was born at Ruben. Um,
who's at NYU, who's a, you know, kind of long, very learned, um,
Afghanistan hand. And he's brought on Peter Jennings on ABC news to,
to kind of lay this out for everyone. Um, and I thought, you know,
he did a fine job, but it,
I think it was formative in cementing the view that somehow Al-Qaeda was
synonymous with this space Afghanistan. Um, and I think again,
I was no Al Qaeda expert then, and I'm, I'm not now,
but I think my immediate thought went to war.
And because my background had been with, at that point,
mostly Afghani had been displaced from Doug kids of war,
who I encountered in news, Pakistan who are refugees. And so on.
I thought immediately, you know,
my mind went to the suffering of Afghan people that this war was going to
sweep, sweep up. Of course, the, the, you know, the defense,
most people who have nothing to do with these politics. So.
We should give maybe a little bit of context that you can speak to. Yeah.
So assume nobody's in to put in anything. Yeah. So let's just say, um,
you're you and I are not experts in anything. Right. What as a historian,
were you studying at the time and thinking about, see, uh, is it,
is it the full global history of Afghanistan? Is it the region?
Were you thinking about, uh,
the Muji had Dean and Al-Qaeda and Taliban,
were you thinking about the Soviet union, the proxy war through Afghanistan?
Were you thinking about Iraq and oil? Like what,
what's the full space of things in your heart in your mind at the time?
I mean, just at the moment, of course it was, you know, there's the,
the sense of you, you know, the suffering and the tragedy of the moment of,
you know, the, what the deaths. And that was, I think I was occupied by,
by the violence of the moment. Um,
but as the conversation turned to Afghanistan as a kind of theater to somehow
respond to this moment, I think immediately what came to mind was that little,
I knew about Al QAA. The times death said that the geography was,
was inaccurate, that this was a, a global network, a global threat,
that this was a kind of, you know, a movement that went beyond borders.
And I think the, it felt early on that Afghanistan was gonna be used as,
as a scapegoat and this intellectually at the time, you know,
I was teaching at American university. My courses, you know,
touched on a range of subjects, but I was trying to complete a book on, um,
Islam and the Russian empire actually mm-hmm <affirmative>.
But in doing that research, which took me across Russia and central Asia,
purely by accident, I had developed an interest in Afghanistan because, uh,
just again, a series of coincidences, I found myself in touch,
can the capital blue Pakistan, without housing, doing American friend,
who was like the king of the market in touch, Ken, he knew everyone.
He run into Afghan merchants there.
They found out I didn't have a place to live.
I didn't know where AF Afghanistan was. Honestly, this was 1997.
I had a vague idea. It was next door. Well, you lived in his Pakistan. Yeah.
In TACAN doing, doing just research. Yeah. Cause it was, you know,
hub of the Russian empire in central Asia. Yeah. So just by accident,
ended up with these young Afghans who took me in as roommates.
And that I think that the sense of that community shaped my idea of,
of what Afghanistan is. It was my first exposure to them. They're a part of a,
a trading ASRA. They, they had brought matches from RGA Lavia.
They had somehow brought, um, flour and some agricultural products from,
from Egypt. And they were sitting in,
in closed containers in TACAN waiting for these Pakistan state to permit them to
trade. So these guys are mostly hanging out during the day.
They would get dressed up,
they would put on suits and ties like you they'd Polish their shoes.
And they would sit around offices, drink tea
Satio then they had feast at lunch. Um, and then at night we would go out.
So part of my research, cause I also had a bottleneck at my research.
I was going to the sit archives and TACAN mm-hmm <affirmative> and because of
the state of who Pakistan, you know,
that was a very kind of suspicious thing to do. So it took a while to get in.
So I had downtime and touch can just like these guys.
So I got to know them pretty well, and it was really just a, uh,
an accidental kind of thing, but grew quite close to them.
And I developed an appreciation of, um, which now I think again,
thinking of the seeds of all this, um,
these people had already lived young guys, you know, in the twenties,
they'd already lived in six or seven countries.
They all spoke half dozen languages. Uh,
one of my best friends there had been a, um, a kickboxer, uh, and break dancer,
trained into Iran. His father was a theater person in Afghanistan. Um,
he told stories of escaping death in Afghanistan during the civil war
to his Pakistan escaping death there. Um, and these were very, you know,
real stories. Can.
You also just briefly mention yeah. Uh, geographically speaking, yes.
Afghanistan, Stan, Stan, you mentioned Iran, right? What,
uh, who are the neighbors of all of this? What,
what are we supposed to be thinking about for people? I, I was all was terrible.
A geography and spatial information. So can you.
Lay it out? Yeah, no. Sure, sure. So TA Ken, you know, as a,
as the capital of Pakistan, it was, um,
a hub of Russian Imperial power in the 19th century.
The Russians take the city from a local kind of Muslim dynasty in 80 65.
It becomes the city that kind of hub of, um,
Soviet power in social Asia after 1917,
it becomes the center of the Soviet Republic of Pakistan,
which becomes independent finally in 1991 when the Soviet union collapses. So.
These are all like these, uh, republics are the.
Fingertips of Soviet power in central Asia. That's that's right.
And they've been independent since 1991,
but they have struggled to disentangle themselves from Moscow,
from one another.
And now they face very serious pressure from China form a kind of periphery of,
you know,
the great machine that is the Chinese economy and its ambitions to stretch
across Asia. Um, for Afghanistan where my roommates,
my friends hailed from, um, yeah,
Afghanistan had fallen into civil war in late 1970s
when left his, tried to seize power there in 1978,
Soviet union then extended from, is Pakistan, you know,
crossing the border with its forces in 1979 to try to shore up this left
government that a cease power in, in 1978. Um,
and so for central Asians in the wider region, you know, their,
their fate had for some decades been tied to,
to AF Afghanistan and in a variety of ways,
but it became much more connected in 1980s when Soviet red army
occupied, um, AF Afghanistan for 10 years.
And here I refer your listeners and viewers to, um,
REO three as the guide to the historically accurate,
the accurate the Bible, the Bible of African remember three. Yeah, yeah. As,
as a fantastic, um, window onto the American view of the war, right?
Mm-hmm <affirmative> but for us Afghans, you know,
there are people who fought against the Soviet army, um,
but of a certain generation, the guys I knew, you know,
their mission was to survive. And so they fled in waves, you know,
had the millions to Pakistan, to Iran,
some went north into so central Asia later in the 1990s, um,
and some were displaced across the planet. So California,
where we're sitting today has a large community that came in the eighties and
nineties in the east bay.